Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to download this practice lab
from the link in the description and try it
out yourself in packet tracer.
In this lab we will practice subnetting using
VLSM, variable-length subnet masks.
This will be very similar to the end of day
15’s lecture video, you will subnet a class
C network into 5 subnets of different sizes.
So, I highly recommend that you try to complete
this lab first, before watching this video
to check your answers.
We are required to subnet the 192.168.5.0/24
network to provide sufficient addressing for
each LAN, as well as the point-to-point connection
between R1 and R2.
We will follow the same process that I introduced
in Day 15’s lecture video.
Assign the largest subnet at the start of
the address space, and then the second largest,
etc, until you have assigned each subnet.
So, that means we will assign subnets in this
order: LAN2, LAN1, LAN3, LAN4, and finally
the point-to-point link.
The instructions also say to assign the first
usable address to the PC in each LAN, and
the last usable address to the router.
Finally, we should configure static routes
so that hosts in each LAN can reach hosts
in the other LANs.
So let’s get started with LAN2.
I hope you’ve already solved this lab and
are just watching this video to check, since
I won’t go step-by-step through each calculation
like in the lecture video.
Let me tab out to this document where I’ve
calculated all of the answers.
So, for LAN2 we must use a /25 prefix length.
LAN2 only requires 64 hosts, and as I’ve
written below a /25 prefix length allows for
126, but if we used a /26 prefix length there
would only be enough addresses for 62 hosts
because we have to subtract 2 for the network
and broadcast addresses.
So, LAN2’s network address is 192.168.5.0,
and its broadcast address is 192.168.5.127,
both /25.  Let’s assign the addresses to PC2 and R1.
Let me go on R1 first.  First, enter privileged
exec mode with ENABLE.
Then, enter global config mode with CONFIGURE
TERMINAL.
R1’s Gigabitethernet0/1 interface is in
LAN2, so INTERFACE G0/1 to configure it.
The broadcast address is 192.168.5.127, so
let’s configure R1’s IP address as one
below it, the last usable address.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.5.126, and for a /25 prefix
length the subnet mask will be 255.255.255.128.
Also, let’s enable the interface with NO
SHUTDOWN.
Let’s confirm our configuration.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE G0/1.
The ‘SHOW IP INTERFACE’ command shows
various information about the interface, primarily
layer 3 information.
You can see here that the IP address has been
configured correctly.
You may notice the broadcast address of 255.255.255.255.
This address basically functions the same
as the subnet broadcast address of 192.168.5.127,
and it can be used for any network.
When we configure other IP addresses and use
this SHOW IP INTERFACE command, those other
interfaces will display the same broadcast address too.
Keep in mind, if a host sends a broadcast
to 255.255.255.255, it won't be sent to ALL
networks, it will still stay in the local
subnet, and a router will NOT route it to
other networks.
The subnet broadcast address however, 192.168.5.127
in this case, can be used by hosts in other
subnets to send a broadcast to this subnet.
Anyway I think I’ll explain that in a lecture
video in the future, so don’t worry about it.
I just wanted to explain it since you can
see it here.
Okay, now let’s configure PC2.  Click on
config, then first set the default gateway
to R1, 192.168.5.126.  Then, click on fastethernet0,
and set the IP address and subnet mask.
The first usable address is 192.168.5.1.  After you enter it you can press tab, and notice it tries to fill in
the subnet mask for me, however since this
isn’t a classful network, it’s a subnet,
let me change the last octet to 128.  Okay,
that’s all for this subnet.
The second largest subnet is LAN1.
Let me go back to my document and let’s
look at LAN1.
So, for LAN1 we will use a /26 subnet mask.
LAN1 requires 45 hosts, and a /26 subnet mask
allows 62.
The network address is the next address after
LAN2’s broadcast address, so it's 192.168.5.128/26.
The broadcast address, with all host bits
set to 1, is 192.168.5.191.
Let’s configure the router and the PC.
I’ll go back to R1 first.  Let’s configure
the G0/0 interface with the last usable address.
INTERFACE G0/0.
IP ADDRESSS 192.168.5.190 255.255.255.192,
which is the subnet mask for a /26 prefix length.
Enable the interface with NO SHUTDOWN, and
let’s check.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE G0/0.
The IP address is correct, and you can see
the same broadcast address 255.255.255.255.
Next let’s configure PC1.
Click on config, set the gateway to 192.168.5.190.
Then click on fastethernet0, set the ip address
to 192.168.5.129, hit tab, and then change the
last octet to 192, for the /26 prefix length.
That’s all for LAN1.
Next up is LAN3.
Let’s go back to that document.
So, for LAN3 we will use a /28 prefix length,
which allows for 14 hosts, exactly the number
we need for LAN3.
Keep in mind, in real networking you want
to leave some extra room for future growth,
but when taking a test do EXACTLY as the instructions
say.
The network address is the next address after
LAN1’s broadcast address, so it’s 192.168.5.192/28.
The broadcast address is 192.168.5.207.
Let’s go configure R2.
Enable.
Conf t.
Interface g0/0.
Let’s configure the last usable address
here.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.5.206 255.255.255.240,
which is the subnet mask for a /28 network.
Enable the interface with NO SHUTDOWN, and
let’s confirm.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE g0/0.
So, the IP address is correct.
Next let’s configure PC3.
Click on config.
Set the gateway address to 192.168.5.206.
Click on fastethernet0, IP address of 192.168.5.193.
Hit tab, and then change the last octet here
to 240.
Okay, that’s all for LAN3.
Next is LAN4.
Let’s go back to that document.   So, for
LAN4 we will actually use a /28 also.
LAN4 requires only 9 hosts, so a /29 prefix
length, which allows only 6 hosts, would be
too small.
The network address is 192.168.5.208, and
broadcast address is 192.168.5.223.
Now let’s go back to R2 and  configure it’s
G0/1 interface.
Interface g0/1.
Ip address 192.168.5.222 255.255.255.240.
Enable the interface with NO SHUTDOWN.
And let’s check, DO SHOW IP INTERFACE G0/1.
Okay, the IP address looks correct.
Let’s go to PC4. config.
Set the gateway to R2’s address, 192.168.5.222.
fastethernet0, set the IP address to the first
usable address, 192.168.5.209, hit tab, and
change the last octet of the subnet mask to
240.
That’s all for LAN4.
The last subnet we have to assign is the point-to-point
connection between R1 and R2.
Let’s go back to the document.  So, we can
use a /30 or /31, I’m going to go with /30,
I just think it’s the safe option to go
with on a Cisco test.
So, the network address is 192.168.5.224,
and broadcast address is 192.168.5.227.
We’ll use the first usable address for R1,
and last usable address for R2.
In fact, those are the only two usable addresses.
Let’s go on R1.
Interface g0/0/0.
Ip address 192.168.5.225 255.255.255.252.
Enable the interface with NO SHUTDOWN.
Let’s check it.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE G0/0/0.
Okay, the address looks good.
Now let’s go on R2. interface g0/0/0.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.5.226 255.255.255.252.
And enable it with NO SHUTDOWN.
And finally let's confirm.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE G0/0/0.
Okay, no problems here.
Now, the last step is to configure static
routes on each router.
Each router has three connected networks.
Those are the point-to-point link, and LAN1
and LAN2 for R1, or LAN3 and LAN4 for R2.
So, we’ll have to configure two static routes
for each router.
First, let’s configure the routes to LAN1 and
LAN2 here on R2.
Exit, to go back to global config mode.
First, LAN1.
IP ROUTE, then LAN1’s network address, 192.168.5.128
255.255.255.192, then let me use the question
mark here.
Note that you can either specify the exit
interface of this router, or the IP address
of the next hop.
I’ll go with the next hop, 192.168.5.225.
Okay, that’s it.
Next, to LAN2, same thing.
IP ROUTE 192.168.5.0 255.255.255.128, and then
the next hop of 192.168.5.225.
Let’s check the route table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.  Okay, you can see the connected
and local routes here, and then the two static
routes we just configured.
Let’s go on R1 and configure the routes
to LAN3 and LAN4.
First, exit to return to global config mode.
So, the route to LAN 3, first.
IP ROUTE 192.168.5.192 255.255.255.240, then
the next hop of 192.168.5.226.
Okay, now
to LAN4.
IP ROUTE 192.168.5.208 255.255.255.240 192.168.5.226.
Let’s check the route table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, looks like R1 has all of the routes
it should.
Let’s just try a ping from PC1 to another
PC, let’s try PC4, to make sure our routes
work.
Really, you should try to ping all other PCs
but I’ll just show one.  Okay, so from
PC1’s CLI, let’s ping to PC4.
PING 192.168.5.209...now, because the ARP
process hasn’t completed yet there may be
a few failures, but if I keep talking you
should see that PC1 can now reach PC4.
Okay, so we have successfully subnetted and
configured a network, and then configured
static routes to provide reachability.
That’s all for this lab.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.